The following list of general rules and attempts process is an ongoing and dynamically changing document. Recent edits will be noted by dates attributed and the identity of the editor. For any enquiries, please email Lachlan Gunner

General Rules and Guidelines – Speed Cocktail Bartending

Valid from 18/07/2025
Last edited by Lachlan Gunner

The following dot points outline, in no particular order, general rules and guidelines pertaining to the discipline of competition bartending known as ‘Speed Cocktail Bartending’. The purpose of this discipline is to test a bartender's speed creating one or multiple cocktails to an outlined quality. 

One cocktail is selected per competition.
A standard Cocktail recipe for each specific cocktail used is designed and immortalised for all speed competitions of that cocktail moving forward.
Amendments to the a standardised cocktail recipe can be made, but must be done so by the bartending competition organisation under the advice of competitors, competition organisers and all other relevant parties. 
All drinks for a discipline (e.g. speed competitions) and sub discipline (e.g. gimlet) must follow the same recipe at all competitions for that discipline or subdiscipline.
Only ingredients from the published recipe must be used. 
Water is not an ingredient unless explicitly listed in the recipe. The only permitted dilution is meltwater generated by the approved preparation method. Any water added from taps, bottles, or other containers during setup or the timed attempt voids the attempt.
All cocktail equipment must be stadardised and published including the use of any jiggers, pouring bottles, speed pourers, ice scoops etc.
Ingredients from the published recipe must be made available to competitors at the time of competition in quantities minimum to satisfy the production of three cocktails. 
All cocktail ingredients must be stadardised and published recipes including syrups, juices etc.
Premixing of any ingredients is not permitted
Temperature of ingredients must be standardised to the best of the ability of the host venue and competition organiser. The default temperature for all ingredients is 3 degrees celsius
All competitions will consist of participants who have entered and registered formally for the competition
All competitors for an event will have three attempts to create the cocktail as fast as possible
Any glass that is chipped or broken during a competitors event will result in a voided attempt
Any spillage / pouring of a liquid after the timer has stopped will result in a voided attempt
During the moment the timer begins, the competitor must not be touching any equipment or ingredients in a moment known as ‘hands off’
Competitors may arrange ingredients, glassware and bar equipment during their setup time.
Competitors must not place any ice or ingredients in any glassware or bar equipment during their setup time
During setup time, the ice scoop may rest on top of the ice in the ice well, but not be inserted into the ice in any way.  
All voided attempts and reason for the voided attempt will be recorded
Voided attempts count as an attempt made. 
A disqualification will result in all three attempts in past or future to be voided. 
The decision of the competition organiser will be fair and final
The consumption of alcohol at all by a competitor during the period of that competitors entry will result in an instant disqualification from the event
A disqualification will result in a last place position
In the event of multiple disqualifications, each competitor disqualified will be joint last place
The period of entry for a competitor begins at the arrival of that competitor at the host venue and ends when that competitor exits the bar after their final attempt. 
As an integrity to the sport, all competitors will make efforts after their final attempt to clean their workstation ready for the next competitor
Each competitor will receive at least 1-minute preparation time to organise the bar to their liking.
It is up to the competitor to ensure that all ingredients and equipment prepared a manner correct to them to satisfy their attempt. 
It is up to the competition organiser to ensure that all ingredients and equipment prepared in a manner correct to satisfy the integrity of the competition and the competitors attempt. 
Once a competitor commits to beginning their attempt, their attempt must end with either of the following: A valid time, a voided attempt or a disqualification. 
Each competitor will be given a maximum of 1 minute in between attempts to reset the bar for the following attempt. 
In the event of a catastrophic failure attempt, the time will pause while the organises of the event ensure the competition area is fit for an attempt upon which the time will resume. 
A competitor may elect to yield any time in preparation for an attempt through confirmation with the timekeeper. 
The beginning of each attempt of a competitor must first be confirmed by the event organiser before a valid attempt is made. Any actions outside of this rule will result in a voided attempt. 
For the sake of measurement, 1 gram is the equivalent of 1ml for all purposes
All weights are measured to the nearest 1 gram
The dry weight of a cocktail glass is defined in the cocktail recipe stipulated. (future note: a finished drink containing ice will have a dry weight measured with the glass ⅔ full of ice and with a garnish prepared. Once a competitor finishes their attempt and the final drink is measured - it may only then have extra ice added in full.
Where a cocktail’s preparation method (shake, stir, build, roll, dump, etc.) is not explicitly specified in the published recipe, the bartender must use the historically recognised method for that drink (IBA specification or other globally accepted source). Any deviation voids the attempt.
If any ingredients are missing from a cocktail, including garnish, the attempt will be considered void.
If the final drink volume in an attempt is measured to be more than twice the recipe suggestion, that competitor is disqualified from the competition (future note: this is to prevent hacking the competition by pre pouring out the bottles prior to a future attempt.)
Only ice that leaves the mixing vessel as part of the prescribed preparation method may enter the cocktail vessel. • No extra cubes, crushed ice, or ice‑water may be added to the cocktail vessel at any stage. • Exception – where the method of the cocktail permits this (e.g., tiki swizzles), competitors may transfer the entire contents of the shaker/tin into the cocktail vessel in a single motion, but no additional ice may be introduced afterwards. Violation of this rule voids the attempt. 
All ingredients poured in an attempt must be measured out to be at least 80% of the recipe requirement. If any ingredient is measured to be poured less than this threshold, the attempt will be voided.(future note: this is to prevent hacking the competition by absorbing a penalty in preference to time taken pouring out an ingredient.)
A time penalty will be applied to each attempt at a rate determined by the published cocktail recipe (e.g. 0.15 sec/ml) for every millilitre variance from poured ingredients in addition to variance from dilution volume.
A competitor's first timed attempt will need to occur 1-minute after their introduction into the bar - if, for whatever reason, there is no attendance during this time - the competitor will be disqualified. 
A competitor must not empty the contents of their shaker tin upon completion of the attempt for inspection by an MBC representative.

The Process of a timekeeper scrutiny:
In between a competitors attempt, the timekeeper must perform a satisfied scrutiny of the attempt. This will follow the following procedure:
Weigh the finished cocktail weight and record
Wipe dry and weigh each ingredient's weight and record. 
Replace the ingredients into the well
Prepare the timekeeping record for the next attempt with relevant information

The Process of a competitors entry:

All ingredients are prepared by bringing them up to capacity, to regulation temperature and weighing them. 
The dry weight of the glass is measured prior to the attempt and placed ready to for competition.
A new competitor is welcomed to the bar
Upon approaching the bar station. A one minute timer begins and the competitor may begin to prepare for their round. 
The timing judge for the competition will prepare the timing record, adding records where appropriate. These records include the competitors name, the time of the attempt, the weight of the ingredients prior to the attempt, the dry weight of the glass prior to the attempt etc.
Once ready, the competitor will wait for confirmation by the timing judge to place a hand on the timing mat.
When ready, the competitor will commence their attempt and end their by placing their hand back on the timing mat. 
When complete, the timing judge will confirm the validity of the attempt.
Any remaining liquid in an attempt is single strained into a container for inspection.
All bottled ingredients are prepared for the next attempt by weighing them. (bottles are not refilled).
A new glass and garnish is prepared and dry weight of the glass is measured prior to the attempt and placed ready for competition.
The timing mat is reset in preparation for the next attempt. 
Steps 5-11 will be repeated for attempt #2 and attempt #3
The competitor will then clean and exit the station.
The ingredients will then be rotated out for the next competitor with previous stock refilled and brought back to appropriate temperature. 

The Process of a competitor reset:
Each ingredient bottle will be filled up in a reasonable and approximate manner to 100% bottle capacity.
The weight of each bottle will be recorded in preparation to pass to the timekeeper
Three empty glasses will be prepared and weight of each will be recorded in preparation to pass to the timekeeper
The weight will be determined to be the final weight of each item inclusive of any accessories to it, including speed pourers, lids etc. 
The timekeeper will prepare the next competitors three record attempts and include all information garnered at this point including the initial weight of the ingredients and the dry weight of all three prepared glasses. 





Standardised bar equipment used:
Pouring bottles: SAVERGLASS COGNACAISE 700ml


Speed Pourers: stainless steel wine pourer

Jigger: 75ml stainless steel stepped jigger

Tins: Zanzi Boston & Toby tin set


—-------------------------------------


Cocktail Recipes and Specs:
The Gimlet:
60ml gin
30ml Lime Juice
15ml Sugar Syrup
Shake on cubed ice and strain into a coupe glass
GARNISH: NONE
Dilution: 30ml

Espresso Martini:
45ml Vodka
15ml Coffee liqueur
15ml Sugar Syrup
60ml Cold Brew Coffee
Shake on cubed ice and strain into a coupe glass
GARNISH: 3 coffee beans. 
Dilution: 30ml

General Rules and Guidelines – Traditional Cocktail Bartending

Valid from 8/03/24
Last edited by Lachlan Gunner

The following dot points outline, in no particular order, general rules and guidelines pertaining to the discipline of competition bartending known as ‘Traditional Cocktail Bartending’. The purpose of this discipline is to test a bartender's creativity by designing a single recipe fit to a outlined brief and preparing three copies for subsequent judging. 

The Competition Organiser must prepare an outline brief for the competition. 
The competition organiser must allocate a brand sponsor for the event or allocate it as an ‘open competition’ by which any brands may be used. 
If the competiiton is a brand sponsored competition, the organiser must specificy a minimum volume of the brand product required to be in each cocktail.
The minimum volume in each cocktail must not exceed three standard drinks. 
The competition organiser may not impose any terms and conditions on the competition outside those stipulated in these guidelines. 
To submit for a competition, each competitor must provide or have made available the following information at a minimum:
Full Name of the competitor
Contact phone and email of the competitor
Official sponsors of the competitor
The bar by which the bartender is currently employed (if applicable)
The full recipe of the cocktail with all relevant details to create the cocktail including all home-made ingredients, garnishes, ice type and measurements. 
The competition organiser may request extra information from a competitor
As an integrity to the sport, any extra information requested by a competition organiser must be information required to facilitate the hosting of the competition or contact of the competitor.
The brief for the competition must describe a style, design, story or make-up of the submitted cocktails or recipes requested by the organiser by the competitors for the period of the competition.
Once announced, the brief is only allowed to be amended on the occasion by which a full refund is offered to all competitors who have registered for the competition.
The competition must be announced with a due date for submissions. 
The competition brief must request its competitors design, prepare and present a finished cocktail.
As an integrity to the sport, a cocktail is defined as its traditional and socially accepted upon definition. 
Each competitor is given a maximum of ten minutes to present their cocktail in front of a panel of three (3) judges and prepare three (3) copies of their cocktail. 
For the definition of a cocktail copy, each of the three copies of a cocktail must include duplicate items or ingredients of the cocktail that rests either within, against or on top of each cocktail; including the vessel itself.
Anything presented that lies outside the definition of a cocktail copy does not require a quantity of three (3).
Each judge must make judgements of a competitiors submission based on the following criteria::
How effectively does the written submission and presentation fit the brief of the competition? (5 points)
How much does the submission showcase an iconic flavour? (5 points)
Does the submission contain an appropriate balance of ingredients? (5 points)
How well does the garnish elevate the submission? (5 points)
How appropriate is the vessel to showcase the submission? (5 points)
For a grand total of 25 points per judge.
The final score of the competitor will be determined as the average of each of the judges total score for that competitor rounded to the nearest 0.1
Judges may not deliberate between the start of the presentation and the submission of their individual scores to the scoring judge.
In the case of a tie, judges will be given a maximum of 10 minutes to deliberate and agree on a winner of the tie by vote.
Only competitors included in the tie may be voted on by the judges in the deliberation process. 
Each judge must cast a single vote per tiebreaker. 
In the case of multiple ties, each tie is looked at and deliberated by the judges separately. 
Setting up and resetting for a traditional competition:
The airtable judging inputs must be organised by completing the following:
In the RAW view, create three record copies of each participating competitor. One for each judge.
Allocate all three judges to each competitor.
Fill in the competition ID for each competitor record.
Create a new view for one new judge by duplicating the ‘template judging view’
In that new view, select the correct competition and the judge in the filter menu.
Duplicate the view and now re-select from the filter menu the second judge.
Repeat step f for the last remaining judge.
The organiser must set up each judge with an airtable enabled device set to their view
THE COMPETITION BEGINS
The ‘winners view’ of the Traditional Judging Table is viewed and the view is filtered for the current competition
For each of the competitors in this view, a new record is made in the results_table ‘results input’ view.
For each of the new records made, the score value is the average of that competitors scores across all three judges. 
A WINNER IS ANNOUNCED
The organiser must delete each judging view.






—-----------------------------------
General Rules and Guidelines – Membership
Valid from 15/3/24
Last edited by Lachlan Gunner

Anyone may become a member by filling out the membership application and paying the membership fee
All affiliated sponsors must be disclosed where relevant in the membership application form. 

The process of checking in entrants to a competition:
Before entrants arrive, the competition organiser must allocate a random run number to each competitor in the entrants table. This is their order of competition and must be logged.
As entrants arrive, they must make themself known to the competition organiser for the evening 
The competition organiser must validate their entry by ensuring all details are correct and payment has been made.
The competition organiser must check them in by ticking their attendance on the entrants table.
The competition organiser must notify the entrant of their run number. 
The registration period will end either 10 minutes before the start of the night's proceedings or once the maximum number of participants has been reached as determined by the organiser, whatever comes first.
